# AEX-141: Non-Fungible Token Standard

```
AEX: 141
Title: Non-Fungible Token Standard
Author: Arjan van Eersel <arjan@toqns.com> (@zkvonsnarkenstein), Marco Walz (@marc0olo), Philipp (@thepiwo), Rogerio (@jyeshe)
License: ISC
Discussions-To: https://forum.aeternity.com/t/aeternity-nft-token-standard/9781
Status: Review
Type: Interface
Created: 2021-09-11
```

## Abstract

A standard implementation of non-fungible tokens for the æternity ecosystem. Initially, the design goal of the primary interface was to be as compatible with ERC-721 as possible, so that anyone who can work with ERC-721 can work with this interface. However, specifically when it comes to dealing with metadata a decision was taken to provide contract developers as much flexibility as possible.

Core differences to the well-known ERC-721 standard:
- Unsafe transactions are not supported. Therefore, all transactions are ought to be safe
- Usage of zero-address for minting or burning is avoided. Thus, explicit events for minting and burning have been defined
- Token transfers do not require the (owner) address to be passed. Only the recipient address needs to be provided to the entrypoint
- High flexibility when it comes to dealing with metadata is provided

## Motivation

The following standard describes standard interfaces for non-fungible tokens. The proposal contains a primary interface and secondary interfaces (extensions) for optional functionality that not everyone might need.

# AEX141 NFT

## IAEX141

```sophia
contract interface IAEX141 =
    datatype metadata_type = URL | OBJECT_ID | MAP
    datatype metadata = MetadataIdentifier(string) | MetadataMap(map(string, string))

    record meta_info = 
        { name: string
        , symbol: string 
        , base_url: option(string)
        , metadata_type : metadata_type }

    datatype event 
        = Transfer(address, address, int)
        | Approval(address, address, int, string)
        | ApprovalForAll(address, address, string)

    entrypoint aex141_extensions : () => list(string)

    entrypoint meta_info : () => meta_info

    entrypoint metadata : (int) => option(metadata)

    entrypoint total_supply : () => int

    entrypoint balance : (address) => option(int)

    entrypoint owner : (int) => option(address)
   
    stateful entrypoint transfer : (address, int, option(string)) => unit

    stateful entrypoint transfer_to_contract : (int) => unit

    stateful entrypoint approve : (address, int, bool) => unit

    stateful entrypoint approve_all : (address, bool) => unit

    entrypoint get_approved : (int) => option(address)

    entrypoint is_approved : (int, address) => bool

    entrypoint is_approved_for_all : (address, address) => bool
```

## Methods

### aex141_extensions\(\)

**Returns** a hardcoded list of all implemented extensions on the deployed contract.

```sophia
entrypoint aex141_extensions() : list(string)
```

### meta_info\(\)

Returns meta information associated with the contract.

Note:
- The `base_url` is optional and is only intended to be used if the `metadata_type` is `URL`. As known from ERC-721 this can be used to resolve metadata for a specific NFT which can be fetched from an URL based on the token id
- The `metadata_type` MUST be defined on contract level and MUST NOT be mixed across various NFTs in a contract

```sophia
entrypoint meta_info() : meta_info
```

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| meta_info | meta_info |

### metadata\(\)

Returns metadata associated with an NFT.

Note:
- The `metadata` can be set in the constructor, as well as by implementing extensions like e.g. `mintable`
- The `metadata` to use depends on the `metadata_type` defined on contract level and provides certain flexibility:
  - for `URL` and `OBJECT_ID` use `MetadataIdentifier`
      - `URL` can represent any URL and typically the NFT id is used to resolve the metadata using that URL, e.g.
          - `ipfs://` serving as `base_url` and pointing to a folder stored on IPFS where immutable metadata is stored (recommended)
          - `https://` serving as `base_url` and pointing to a traditional website where metadata is stored
          - ...
      - `OBJECT_ID` can be used to refer to any kind of item which typically already exists (e.g. the VIN of a car)
  - for `MAP` use `MetadataMap`
    - `MAP` provides almost unlimited flexibility and allows any kind of metadata to be represented in a map

```sophia
entrypoint metadata(token_id: int) : option(metadata)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_id | int |

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| data | option(metadata) |

### total_supply\(\)

Returns the total amount of NFTs in circulation.

```sophia
entrypoint total_supply() : ínt
```

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| total_supply | int |

### balance\(\)

Returns the number of NFTs owned by the account with address `owner` in the contract. If the owner address is unknown to the contract, `None` will be returned. Using `option` type as a return value allows us to determine if the account owns 0, more than 0, or the account has never owned a balance and is still unknown to the contract.

```sophia
entrypoint balance(owner: address) : option(int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| owner | address |

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| balance | option(int) |

### owner\(\)

Returns the owner's address for the provided `token_id` if the NFT is minted. If the NFT isn't minted, `None` will be returned. 

```sophia
entrypoint owner(token_id: int) : option(address)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_id | int |

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| owner | option(address) |

### transfer\(\)
Transfers NFT with ID `token_id` from the current owner to the `to` address. Will invoke `IAEX141Receiver.on_aex141_received` if the `to` address belongs to a contract. If provided, `data` will be submitted with the invocation of `IAEX141Receiver.on_aex141_received`. Emits the `Transfer` event.

Note: For security reasons reentrancy is not possible. Therefore contracts cannot use this entrypoint to transfer NFTs to itself. Use `transfer_to_contract` instead to cover this scenario.

Throws if:
- `Call.caller` is NOT the current owner or NOT approved to transfer on behalf of the owner;
- `token_id` is NOT a valid token;
- the invocation of `IAEX141Receiver.on_aex141_received` fails.

```sophia
stateful entrypoint transfer(to: address, token_id: int, data: option(string)) : unit
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_id | int |
| data | option(string) |

### transfer_to_contract\(\)
Transfers NFT with ID `token_id` from the current owner to the contract calling this entrypoint. As reentrancy is not possible for security reasons, this entrypoint MUST be used if a contract (e.g. NFT marketplace) wants to transfer the NFT to itself on behalf of the owner. Emits the `Transfer` event.

Throws if:
- `Call.caller` is NOT a contract or NOT approved to transfer on behalf of the owner;
- `token_id` is NOT a valid token;

```sophia
stateful entrypoint transfer(to: address, token_id: int, data: option(string)) : unit
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| to | address |
| token_id | int |
| data | option(string) |

### approve\(\)

Sets the `approved` address to interact on behalf of an owner for the NFT with ID `token_id`. If `enabled` is true the `operator` address is approved, if `false` the approval is revoked. Throws unless caller is the current NFT owner, or an authorized operator of the current owner. Emits the `Approval` event.

```sophia
stateful entrypoint approve(approved: address, token_id: int, enabled: bool) : unit
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| approved | address |
| token_id | int |
| enabled | bool |

### approve_all\(\)

Enables or disables approval for an `operator` address to manage all of the caller's NFTs. If `enabled` is true, the `operator` address is approved, if `false`, the approval is revoked. Emits the `ApprovalForAll` event.

```sophia
stateful entrypoint approve_all(operator: address, enabled: bool) : unit
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| operator | address |
| enabled | bool |

### get_approved\(\)

Returns the address approved to interact with the NFT with ID `token_id` or returns `None` if no approval has been set. Throws if NFT with ID `token_id` does not exist.

```sophia
entrypoint get_approved(token_id: int) : option(address)
``` 

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_id | int |

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| approved | option(address) |

### is_approved\(\)

Returns `true` if `approved` address is approved to transact for NFT with ID `token_id`.

```sophia
entrypoint is_approved(token_id: int, approved: address) : bool
``` 

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_id | int |
| approved | address |

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| approved | bool |
    
### is_approved_for_all\(\)

Returns `true` if `operator` is approved to commit transactions on behalf of `owner`.

Indicates whether an address is an authorized operator for another address.

```sophia
entrypoint is_approved_for_all(owner: address, operator: address) : bool
``` 

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| owner | address |
| approved | address |

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| approved | bool |
     
## Events

```sophia
datatype event 
        = Transfer(address, address, int)
        | Approval(address, address, int, string)
        | ApprovalForAll(address, address, string)
```

### *Transfer*

This event MUST be triggered and emitted when tokens are transferred.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(from, to, token_id)`

```sophia
Transfer(address, address, int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| from | address |
| to | address |
| token_id | int |

### *Approval*

This event MUST be triggered and emitted upon approval, including revocation of approval.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(owner, approved, token_id, enabled)`.
Enabled is of type string, because of a limit of 3 on indexed values. Since address, int and bool are automatically indexed, having enabled as bool would cause an error, as it would be the 4th indexed item. Use `"true"` or `"false"` as return values instead.

```sophia
Approval(address, address, int, string)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| owner | address |
| approved | address |
| token_id | int |
| enabled | string |

### *ApprovalForAll*

This event MUST be triggered and emitted upon a change of operator status, including revocation of approval for all NFTs in the contract.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(owner, operator, approved)`

For idiomatic reasons `approved` is, just as with `Approval`, of type `string`

```sophia
ApprovalForAll(address, address, string)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| owner | address |
| operator | address |
| approved | string |

# Receiver contract interface

The standard only allows safe transfers of tokens. On transfer a check MUST be performed which checks if the recipient is a contract and if so the transfer MAY ONLY happen if `on_aex141_received` returns true.

## AEX141Receiver

```sophia
contract interface IAEX141Receiver = 
    entrypoint on_aex141_received : (option(address), int, option(string)) => bool
```

### on_aex141_received\(\)

Deals with receiving NFTs on behalf of a contract. Contracts MUST implement this interface to be able to receive NFTs. Mint and transfer transactions will invoke the `on_aex141_received` function.

Returns `true` or `false` to signal whether processing the received NFT was successful or not.

```sophia
entrypoint on_aex141_received(from: option(address), token_id: int, data: option(string)) : bool
```
| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| from | option(address) |
| token_id | int |
| data | option(string) |

# Extensions

This section covers the extendability of the basic token - e.g. mintable, burnable.

When an NFT contract implements an extension its name should be included in the `aex141_extensions` array, in order for third party software or contracts to know the interface.
Any extensions should be implementable without permission. Developers of extensions MUST choose a name for `aex141_extensions` that is not yet used. Developers CAN make a pull request to the reference implementation for general purpose extensions and maintainers choose to eventually include them.

## Extension Mintable ("mintable")

The `mintable` extension SHOULD be used for generic NFT minting without specific requirements in regards to minting.

Note: If you aim to reuse the same metadata across many NFTs you might prefer the `mintable_templates` extension.

```sophia
contract interface IAEX141Mintable =

    datatype event = Mint(address, int)

    stateful entrypoint mint : (address, option(metadata), option(string)) => int
```

### mint\(\)

Issues a new token to the provided address. If the `owner` is a contract, `IAEX141Receiver.on_aex141_received` will be called with `data` if provided.

Emits the `Mint` event.

Throws if the call to `IAEX141Receiver.on_aex141_received` implementation failed (safe transfer)

```sophia
stateful entrypoint mint(owner: address, metadata: option(metadata), data: option(string)) : int
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| owner | address |
| metadata | option(metadata) |
| data  | option(string) |

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_id | int |

## Extension Mintable Limit ("mintable_limit")

The `mintable_limit` extension SHOULD be used if the amount of NFTs to mint should be limited/capped. It MAY ONLY be used in combination with the `mintable` extension.

The initially defined token limit MUST be greater than or equal to 1.

Emits the `TokenLimit` event on contract creation.

```sophia
contract interface IAEX141MintableLimit =

    datatype event
        = TokenLimit(int)
        | TokenLimitDecrease(int, int)

    entrypoint token_limit : () => int
    stateful entrypoint decrease_token_limit : (int) => unit
```

### token_limit\(\)

Returns the limit / max amount of NFTs that can be minted.

```sophia
entrypoint token_limit() : ínt
```

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_limit | int |

### decrease_token_limit\(\)

Decreases the NFT limit/cap defined in the collection. An increase of the limit is forbidden.

Emits the `TokenLimitDecrease` event.

Throws if:
- `new_limit` equals the current `token_limit`
- `new_limit` is lower than the current `total_supply`

```sophia
stateful entrypoint decrease_token_limit(new_limit: int) : unit
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| new_limit | int |

## Extension Burnable ("burnable")

The `burnable` extension SHOULD be used if NFTs within a contract are intended to be burnable.

```sophia
contract interface IAEX141Burnable =

    datatype event = Burn(address, int)

    stateful entrypoint burn : (int) => unit
```

### burn\(\)

Burns the NFT with the provided `token_id`.

Emits the `Burn` event.

Throws if `Call.caller` is NOT the current owner or NOT approved to transfer on behalf of the owner.

```sophia
stateful entrypoint burn(token_id: int) : unit
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_id | int |

## Extension Mintable Templates ("mintable_templates")

The `mintable_templates` extension SHOULD be used if multiple NFTs within a contract should share the same metadata. The extension provides the possbility to create templates. Optionally an edition limit for each template can be defined on template creation. If no edition limit is provided, it's considered to be unlimited. The edition limit can be decreased at any point of time as long as the new value does not exceed the current edition supply. Also, templates can be deleted if no NFT has been created using the template.

```sophia
contract interface IAEX141MintableTemplates =

    record template =
        { immutable_metadata_url: string
        , edition_limit: option(int)
        , edition_supply: int }

    datatype event 
        = TemplateCreation(int, string, int)
        | TemplateDeletion(int)
        | TemplateMint(address, int, int, string)
        | EditionLimit(int, int)
        | EditionLimitDecrease(int, int, int)

    entrypoint template : (int) => option(template)
    entrypoint template_supply : () => int

    stateful entrypoint create_template : (string, option(int)) => int
    stateful entrypoint delete_template : (int) => unit
    stateful entrypoint template_mint : (address, int, option(string)) => int
    stateful entrypoint decrease_edition_limit : (int, int) => unit
```

### create_template\(\)

Creates a new template for specific metadata stored in an immutable data storage (e.g. IPFS). The edition limit defines how many NFTs can be minted based on a specific template. If no edition limit is provided, an unlimited amount of NFTs can be created using the template. The edition limit can be changed at any time and only be decreased.

Emits the `TemplateCreation` event.

Note: It's recommended to perform a check if `immutable_metadata_url` is considered valid according to individual requirements.

```sophia
stateful entrypoint create_template(immutable_metadata_url: string, edition_limit: option(int)) : int
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| immutable_metadata_url | string |
| edition_limit | option(int) |

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| template_id | int |

### delete_template\(\)

Deletes the template with the provided id.

Emits the `TemplateDeletion` event.

Throws if an NFT based on this template has already been created.

```sophia
stateful entrypoint delete_template(template_id: int) : unit
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| template_id | int |

### template_mint\(\)

Mints a new NFT for the provided template id.

Emits the `TemplateMint` event.

Throws if:

- the provided `template_id` does not exist
- the mint would exceed the current `edition_limit` of the template
- the call to `IAEX141Receiver.on_aex141_received` implementation failed (safe transfer)

```sophia
stateful entrypoint template_mint(to: address, template_id: int, data: option(string)) : int
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| to | address |
| template_id | int |
| data  | option(string) |

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_id | int |

### decrease_edition_limit\(\)

Decreases the edition limit of a specific template. An increase of the edition limit of a template is forbidden..

Emits the `EditionLimitDecrease` event.

Throws if:

- the provided `template_id` does not exist
- the `new_limit` is equal to or lower than 0
- the `new_limit` is equal to or higher than the current edition limit
- the `new_limit` is lower than the current edition supply

```sophia
stateful entrypoint decrease_edition_limit(template_id: int, new_limit: int) : unit
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| template_id | int |
| new_limit  | int |

## Extension Mintable Templates Limit ("mintable_templates_limit")

The `mintable_templates_limit` extension SHOULD be used to introduce a limit/cap for the amount of templates that may be in existence. It MAY ONLY be used in combination with the `mintable_templates` extension.

```sophia
contract interface IAEX141MintableTemplatesLimit =

    datatype event 
        = TemplateLimit(int)
        | TemplateLimitDecrease(int, int)

    entrypoint template_limit : () => int

    stateful entrypoint decrease_template_limit : (int) => unit
```

### template_limit\(\)

Returns the limit / max amount of templates that can be created.

```sophia
entrypoint template_limit() : ínt
```

| return | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| template_limit | int |

### decrease_template_limit\(\)

Decreases the template limit/cap defined in the contract. An increase of the limit is forbidden.

Emits the `TemplateLimitDecrease` event.

Throws if:
- `new_limit` equals to or is lower than 0
- `new_limit` equals the current `token_limit`
- `new_limit` is lower than the current `total_supply`

```sophia
stateful entrypoint decrease_template_limit(new_limit: int) : unit
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| new_limit | int |

## Extension Mutable Attributes ("mutable_attributes")

The `mutable_attributes` extension SHOULD be used if NFTs in the contract should store attributes which can change over time. This can e.g. be beneficial for game assets where users could level up their characters. The mutable attributes are expected to be provided in a JSON string.

```sophia
contract interface IAEX141MutableAttributes =

    datatype event = MutableAttributesUpdate(int, string)

    stateful entrypoint update_mutable_attributes : (int, string) => unit
```

### update_mutable_attributes\(\)

Updates the JSON string that contains mutable attributes of the NFT.

Emits the `MutableAttributesUpdate` event.

Throws if the provided `token_id` does not exist.

```sophia
stateful entrypoint update_mutable_attributes(token_id: int, mutable_attributes: string) : unit
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_id | int |
| mutable_attributes | string |

## Extension Events

**Mint**

This event is defined by the `mintable` extension and MUST be triggered whenever a new token is minted.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(to, token_id)`

```sophia
Mint(address, int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| to | address |
| token_id | int |

**TokenLimit**

This event is defined by the `mintable_limit` extension and MUST be triggered in the `init` entrypoint during contract creation.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(limit)`

```sophia
TokenLimit(int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| limit | int |

**TokenLimitDecrease**

This event is defined by the `mintable_limit` extension and MUST be triggered whenever the `decrease_token_limit` entrypoint is called.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(old_limit, new_limit)`

```sophia
TokenLimitDecrease(int, int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| old_limit | int |
| new_limit | int |

**Burn**

This event is defined by the `burn` extension and MUST be triggered whenever an NFT is burned.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(owner, token_id)`

```sophia
Burn(address, int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| owner | address |
| token_id | int |

**TemplateCreation**

This event is defined by the `mintable_templates` extension and MUST be triggered whenever a new template is created.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(template_id, immutable_metadata_url, edition_size)`

```sophia
TemplateCreation(int, string, int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| template_id | int |
| immutable_metadata_url | string |
| edition_size | int |

**TemplateDeletion**

This event is defined by the `mintable_templates` extension and MUST be triggered whenever a template is deleted.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(template_id)`

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| template_id | int |

**TemplateMint**

This event is defined by the `mintable_templates` extension and MUST be triggered whenever a new NFT is minted.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(to, template_id, token_id, edition_serial)`. Sophia does not allow 4 "indexed" values as of writing the standard. For this reason `edition_serial` defined as type `string`.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(to, template_id, token_id, edition_serial)`

```sophia
TemplateMint(address, int, int, string)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| to | int |
| template_id | int |
| token_id | int |
| edition_serial | string |

**EditionLimit**

This event is defined by the `mintable_templates` extension and MUST be triggered whenever a new template is created which specifies an edition limit.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(template_id, edition_limit)`

```sophia
EditionLimit(int, int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| template_id | int |
| edition_limit | int |

**EditionLimitDecrease**

This event is defined by the `mintable_templates` extension and MUST be triggered whenever the `decrease_edition_limit` entrypoint is called.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(template_id, old_limit, new_limit)`

```sophia
EditionLimitDecrease(int, int, int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| template_id | int |
| old_limit | int |
| new_limit | int |

**TemplateLimit**

This event is defined by the `mintable_templates_limit` extension and MUST be triggered in the `init` entrypoint during contract creation.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(limit)`

```sophia
TemplateLimit(int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| limit | int |

**TemplateLimitDecrease**

This event is defined by the `mintable_templates_limit` extension and MUST be triggered whenever the `decrease_template_limit` entrypoint is called.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(old_limit, new_limit)`

```sophia
TemplateLimitDecrease(int, int)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| old_limit | int |
| new_limit | int |

**MutableAttributesUpdate**

This event is defined by the `mutable_attributes` extension and MUST be triggered whenever the mutable attributes of an NFT are updated.

The event arguments should be as follows: `(token_id, mutable_attributes)`

```sophia
MutableAttributesUpdate(token_id, string)
```

| parameter | type |
| :--- | :--- |
| token_id | int |
| mutable_attributes | string |

## Implementation

There are currently following reference implementations available which follows defined standard:

- [aex141-nft-collection-example](https://github.com/aeternity/aex141-nft-collection-example)
   - [CollectionUniqueNFTs.aes](https://github.com/aeternity/aex141-nft-collection-example/blob/master/contracts/CollectionUniqueNFTs.aes) implements the following extensions:
        - `mintable`
        - `mintable_limit`
        - `burnable`
   - [CollectionTemplateEditionNFTs.aes](https://github.com/aeternity/aex141-nft-collection-example/blob/master/contracts/CollectionTemplateEditionNFTs.aes) implements the following extensions:
        - `mintable_templates`
        - `mintable_templates_limit`
        - `mutable_attributes`
        - `burnable`

Additionally there exists following showcase for a simple NFT marketplace using AEX-141:
- [aex141-nft-simple-marketplace](https://github.com/aeternity/aex141-nft-simple-marketplace)